docs/features/projections.md, before:

<script setup>

import * as Plot from "@observablehq/plot";
import * as d3 from "d3";
import * as topojson from "topojson-client";
import {computed, ref, shallowRef, onMounted} from "vue";

const longitude = ref(90);
const radius = ref(30);
const circle = computed(() => d3.geoCircle().center([9, 34]).radius(radius.value).precision(2)());
const projection = ref("equirectangular");
const westport = shallowRef({type: null});
const earthquakes = shallowRef([]);
const walmarts = shallowRef([]);
const world = shallowRef(null);
const land = computed(() => world.value ? topojson.feature(world.value, world.value.objects.land) : {type: null});
const us = shallowRef(null);
const nation = computed(() => us.value ? topojson.feature(us.value, us.value.objects.nation) : {type: null});
const statemesh = computed(() => us.value ? topojson.mesh(us.value, us.value.objects.states, (a, b) => a !== b) : {type: null});

onMounted(() => {
  d3.json("https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/feed/v1.0/summary/2.5_week.geojson").then((data) => (earthquakes.value = data.features.map((f) => ({longitude: f.geometry.coordinates[0], latitude: f.geometry.coordinates[1], magnitude: f.properties.mag}))));
  d3.json("../data/countries-110m.json").then((data) => (world.value = data));
  d3.tsv("../data/walmarts.tsv", d3.autoType).then((data) => (walmarts.value = data));
  d3.json("../data/westport-house.json").then((data) => (westport.value = data));
  d3.json("../data/us-counties-10m.json").then((data) => (us.value = data));
});

</script>

# Projections

A **projection** maps abstract coordinates in *x* and *y* to pixel positions on screen. Most often, abstract coordinates are spherical (degrees longitude and latitude), as when rendering a geographic map. For example, below we show earthquakes in the last seven days with a magnitude of 2.5 or higher as reported by the [USGS](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/feed/v1.0/geojson.php). Use the slider to adjust the *orthographic* projection’s center of longitude.

<p>
  <label class="label-input">
    Longitude:
    <input type="range" v-model.number="longitude" min="-180" max="180" step="1">
    <span style="font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;">{{longitude}}°</span>
  </label>
</p>

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-earthquake-globe
```js
Plot.plot({
  projection: {type: "orthographic", rotate: [-longitude, -30]},
  r: {transform: (d) => Math.pow(10, d)}, // convert Richter to amplitude
  style: "overflow: visible;", // allow dots to escape
  marks: [
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor", fillOpacity: 0.2}),
    Plot.sphere(),
    Plot.dot(earthquakes, {x: "longitude", y: "latitude", r: "magnitude", stroke: "red", fill: "red", fillOpacity: 0.2})
  ]
})
```
:::

Above, a [geo mark](../marks/geo.md) draws polygons representing land and a [sphere mark](../marks/geo.md#sphere-options) draws the outline of the globe. A [dot mark](../marks/dot.md) draws earthquakes as circles sized by magnitude.

The geo mark is “projection aware” so that it can handle all the nuances of projecting spherical polygons to the screen—leaning on [d3-geo](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo) to provide [adaptive sampling](https://observablehq.com/@d3/adaptive-sampling) with configurable precision, [antimeridian cutting](https://observablehq.com/@d3/antimeridian-cutting), and clipping. The dot mark is not; instead, Plot applies the projection in place of the *x* and *y* scales. Hence, projections work with any mark that consumes continuous **x** and **y** channels—as well as marks that use **x1** & **y1** and **x2** & **y2**. Each mark implementation decides whether to handle projections specially or to treat the projection as any other position scale. (For example, the [line mark](../marks/line.md) is also projection-aware.)

:::info
Marks that require *band* scales (bars, cells, and ticks) cannot be used with projections. Likewise one-dimensional marks such as rules cannot be used, though see [#1164](https://github.com/observablehq/plot/issues/1164).
:::

Plot provides a variety of built-in projections. And as above, all world projections can be rotated to show a different aspect.

<p>
  <label class="label-input">
    Projection:
    <select v-model="projection">
      <!-- <option>albers-usa</option> -->
      <!-- <option>albers</option> -->
      <option>azimuthal-equal-area</option>
      <option>azimuthal-equidistant</option>
      <!-- <option>conic-conformal</option> -->
      <option>conic-equal-area</option>
      <option>conic-equidistant</option>
      <option>equal-earth</option>
      <option>equirectangular</option>
      <option>gnomonic</option>
      <!-- <option>identity</option> -->
      <!-- <option>reflect-y</option> -->
      <option>mercator</option>
      <option>orthographic</option>
      <option>stereographic</option>
      <option>transverse-mercator</option>
    </select>
  </label>
</p>

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-world-projections
```js-vue
Plot.plot({
  projection: "{{projection}}",
  marks: [
    Plot.graticule(),
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor"}),
    Plot.sphere()
  ]
})
```
:::

Why so many? Each projection has its strengths and weaknesses:

- _conformal_ projections preserve angles and local shape,
- _equal-area_ projections preserve area (use these for choropleths),
- _equidistant_ projections preserve distance from one (or two) points,
- _azimuthal_ projections expand radially from a central feature,
- _cylindrical_ projections have symmetry around the axis of rotation,
- the _stereographic_ projection preserves circles, and
- the _gnomonic_ projection displays all great circles as straight lines!

No single projection is best at everything. It is impossible, for example, for a projection to be both conformal and equal-area.

In addition to world projections, Plot provides the U.S.-centric *albers-usa* conic equal-area projection with an inset of Alaska and Hawaii. (Note that the scale for Alaska is diminished: it is projected at 0.35× its true relative area.)

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-albers-usa-projection
```js
Plot.plot({
  projection: "albers-usa",
  marks: [
    Plot.geo(nation),
    Plot.geo(statemesh, {strokeOpacity: 0.2})
  ]
})
```
:::

:::tip
Use the *albers-usa* projection for U.S.-centric choropleth maps.
:::

For maps that focus on a specific region, use the **domain** option to zoom in. This object should be a GeoJSON object. For example, you can use [d3.geoCircle](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#geoCircle) to generate a circle of a given radius centered at a given longitude and latitude. You can also use the **inset** options for a bit of padding around the **domain**.

<p>
  <label class="label-input">
    Radius:
    <input type="range" v-model.number="radius" min="10" max="50" step="0.1">
    <span style="font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;">{{radius.toFixed(1)}}°</span>
  </label>
</p>

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-projection-domain
```js
Plot.plot({
  projection: {
    type: "azimuthal-equidistant",
    rotate: [-9, -34],
    domain: circle,
    inset: 10
  },
  marks: [
    Plot.graticule(),
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor", fillOpacity: 0.3}),
    Plot.geo(circle, {stroke: "red", strokeWidth: 2}),
    Plot.frame()
  ]
})
```

```js
circle = d3.geoCircle().center([9, 34]).radius(radius).precision(2)()
```

If none of Plot’s built-in projections meet your needs, you can use any of [D3’s extended projections](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo-projection) by specifying the **projection** option as a function that returns a D3 projection. Below, a map of Antarctica in a polar aspect of the *azimuthal-equidistant* projection.

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-polar-projection
```js
Plot.plot({
  width: 688,
  height: 688,
  projection: ({width, height}) => d3.geoAzimuthalEquidistant()
    .rotate([0, 90])
    .translate([width / 2, height / 2])
    .scale(width)
    .clipAngle(40),
  marks: [
    Plot.graticule(),
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor"}),
    Plot.frame()
  ]
})
```
:::

While this notebook mostly details spherical projections, you can use the *identity* projection to display planar geometry. For example, below we draw a schematic of the second floor of the [Westport House](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westport_House) in Dundee, Ireland.

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-floor-plan
```js
Plot.geo(westport).plot({projection: {type: "identity", domain: westport}})
```
:::

:::tip
There’s also a *reflect-y* projection in case *y* points up↑.
:::

Naturally, Plot’s projection system is compatible with its [faceting system](./facets.md). Below, a comic strip of sorts shows the locations of Walmart store openings in past decades.

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-map-small-multiples
```js
Plot.plot({
  marginLeft: 0,
  marginRight: 0,
  projection: "albers",
  fx: {
    interval: d3.utcYear.every(10),
    tickFormat: (d) => `${d.getUTCFullYear()}’s`,
    label: null
  },
  marks: [
    Plot.geo(statemesh, {strokeOpacity: 0.1}),
    Plot.geo(nation),
    Plot.dot(walmarts, {fx: "date", x: "longitude", y: "latitude", r: 1, fill: "currentColor"})
  ]
})
```
:::

:::info
This uses the [**interval** scale option](../transforms/interval.md) to bin temporal data into facets by decade.
:::

To learn more about mapping with Plot, see our hands-on tutorials:

* [Build your first map with Observable Plot](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/build-your-first-map-with-observable-plot)
* [Build your first choropleth map with Observable Plot](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/build-your-first-choropleth-map-with-observable-plot)

## Projection options

The **projection** [plot option](./plots.md) applies a two-dimensional (often geographic) projection in place of **x** and **y** scales. It is typically used in conjunction with a [geo mark](../marks/geo.md) to produce a map, but can be used with any mark that supports **x** and **y** channels, such as [dot](../marks/dot.md), [text](../marks/text.md), [arrow](../marks/arrow.md), and [rect](../marks/rect.md). For marks that use **x1**, **y1**, **x2**, and **y2** channels, the two projected points are ⟨*x1*, *y1*⟩ and ⟨*x2*, *y2*⟩; otherwise, the projected point is ⟨*x*, *y*⟩.

The following built-in named projections are supported:

* *equirectangular* - the equirectangular, or *plate carrée*, projection
* *orthographic* - the orthographic projection
* *stereographic* - the stereographic projection
* *mercator* - the Mercator projection
* *equal-earth* - the [Equal Earth projection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_Earth_projection) by Šavrič *et al.*
* *azimuthal-equal-area* - the azimuthal equal-area projection
* *azimuthal-equidistant* - the azimuthal equidistant projection
* *conic-conformal* - the conic conformal projection
* *conic-equal-area* - the conic equal-area projection
* *conic-equidistant* - the conic equidistant projection
* *gnomonic* - the gnomonic projection
* *transverse-mercator* - the transverse Mercator projection
* *albers* - the Albers’ conic equal-area projection
* *albers-usa* - a composite Albers conic equal-area projection suitable for the United States
* *identity* - the identity projection for planar geometry
* *reflect-y* - like the identity projection, but *y* points up
* null (default) - the null projection for pre-projected geometry in screen coordinates

In addition to these named projections, the **projection** option may be specified as a [D3 projection](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#projections), or any custom projection that implements [*projection*.stream](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#projection_stream), or a function that receives a configuration object ({*width*, *height*, ...*options*}) and returns such a projection. In the last case, the width and height represent the frame dimensions minus any insets.

If the **projection** option is specified as an object, the following additional projection options are supported:

* **type** - one of the projection names above
* **parallels** - the [standard parallels](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#conic_parallels) (for conic projections only)
* **precision** - the [sampling threshold](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#projection_precision)
* **rotate** - a two- or three- element array of Euler angles to rotate the sphere
* **domain** - a GeoJSON object to fit in the center of the (inset) frame
* **inset** - inset by the given amount in pixels when fitting to the frame (default zero)
* **insetLeft** - inset from the left edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **insetRight** - inset from the right edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **insetTop** - inset from the top edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **insetBottom** - inset from the bottom edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **clip** - the projection clipping method

The following projection clipping methods are supported for **clip**:

* *frame* or true (default) - clip to the extent of the frame (including margins but not insets)
* a number - clip to a great circle of the given radius in degrees centered around the origin
* null or false - do not clip

Whereas the **clip** [mark option](./marks.md#mark-options) is implemented using SVG clipping, the **clip** projection option affects the generated geometry and typically produces smaller SVG output.

Commit message:

suggestions for the docs (#1500)
* remove precision(2), which introduces unnecessary complexity
(for a nicer circle, I'd recommend we change the default precision of d3.geoCircle, cf. https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/issues/270)

* projection-aware

* crs

* show local time

* sqrt is shorthand for pow

* link threshold to the domain option

* auto powers chart cell

* micro-document autoSpec

* avoid repetition

* simpler reading?

* infinite values are ignored

* remove links to (valuable but not crucial) prior art

* avoid repetition

* add a non-unique selector example (a sampler)

* remove unused energy table

* explicit "interface" instead of API.
An alternative might be to link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API, or use an abbr

* ask yourself

* named UTC intervals

* Update projections.md

* Update scales.md

* Update scales.md

* Update scales.md

* Update area.md

* Update auto.md

* Update bar.md

* fix links to sort mark option; document basic transforms

* move interval scale option to scales

* time, not necessarily UTC

* necessarily UTC

* infinity may not gap

* edit

* interval scale option tip

* remove blank line

* no ask yourself

---------

Co-authored-by: Mike Bostock <mbostock@gmail.com>

docs/features/projections.md, after:

<script setup>

import * as Plot from "@observablehq/plot";
import * as d3 from "d3";
import * as topojson from "topojson-client";
import {computed, ref, shallowRef, onMounted} from "vue";

const longitude = ref(90);
const radius = ref(30);
const circle = computed(() => d3.geoCircle().center([9, 34]).radius(radius.value)());
const projection = ref("equirectangular");
const westport = shallowRef({type: null});
const earthquakes = shallowRef([]);
const walmarts = shallowRef([]);
const world = shallowRef(null);
const land = computed(() => world.value ? topojson.feature(world.value, world.value.objects.land) : {type: null});
const us = shallowRef(null);
const nation = computed(() => us.value ? topojson.feature(us.value, us.value.objects.nation) : {type: null});
const statemesh = computed(() => us.value ? topojson.mesh(us.value, us.value.objects.states, (a, b) => a !== b) : {type: null});

onMounted(() => {
  d3.json("https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/feed/v1.0/summary/2.5_week.geojson").then((data) => (earthquakes.value = data.features.map((f) => ({longitude: f.geometry.coordinates[0], latitude: f.geometry.coordinates[1], magnitude: f.properties.mag}))));
  d3.json("../data/countries-110m.json").then((data) => (world.value = data));
  d3.tsv("../data/walmarts.tsv", d3.autoType).then((data) => (walmarts.value = data));
  d3.json("../data/westport-house.json").then((data) => (westport.value = data));
  d3.json("../data/us-counties-10m.json").then((data) => (us.value = data));
});

</script>

# Projections

A **projection** maps abstract coordinates in *x* and *y* to pixel positions on screen. Most often, abstract coordinates are spherical (degrees longitude and latitude), as when rendering a geographic map. For example, below we show earthquakes in the last seven days with a magnitude of 2.5 or higher as reported by the [USGS](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/feed/v1.0/geojson.php). Use the slider to adjust the *orthographic* projection’s center of longitude.

<p>
  <label class="label-input">
    Longitude:
    <input type="range" v-model.number="longitude" min="-180" max="180" step="1">
    <span style="font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;">{{longitude}}°</span>
  </label>
</p>

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-earthquake-globe
```js
Plot.plot({
  projection: {type: "orthographic", rotate: [-longitude, -30]},
  r: {transform: (d) => Math.pow(10, d)}, // convert Richter to amplitude
  style: "overflow: visible;", // allow dots to escape
  marks: [
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor", fillOpacity: 0.2}),
    Plot.sphere(),
    Plot.dot(earthquakes, {x: "longitude", y: "latitude", r: "magnitude", stroke: "red", fill: "red", fillOpacity: 0.2})
  ]
})
```
:::

Above, a [geo mark](../marks/geo.md) draws polygons representing land and a [sphere mark](../marks/geo.md#sphere-options) draws the outline of the globe. A [dot mark](../marks/dot.md) draws earthquakes as circles sized by magnitude.

The geo mark is “projection aware” so that it can handle all the nuances of projecting spherical polygons to the screen—leaning on [d3-geo](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo) to provide [adaptive sampling](https://observablehq.com/@d3/adaptive-sampling) with configurable precision, [antimeridian cutting](https://observablehq.com/@d3/antimeridian-cutting), and clipping. The dot mark is not; instead, Plot applies the projection in place of the *x* and *y* scales. Hence, projections work with any mark that consumes continuous **x** and **y** channels—as well as marks that use **x1** & **y1** and **x2** & **y2**. Each mark implementation decides whether to handle projections specially or to treat the projection as any other position scale. (For example, the [line mark](../marks/line.md) is projection-aware to draw geodesics.)

:::info
Marks that require *band* scales (bars, cells, and ticks) cannot be used with projections. Likewise one-dimensional marks such as rules cannot be used, though see [#1164](https://github.com/observablehq/plot/issues/1164).
:::

Plot provides a variety of built-in projections. And as above, all world projections can be rotated to show a different aspect.

<p>
  <label class="label-input">
    Projection:
    <select v-model="projection">
      <!-- <option>albers-usa</option> -->
      <!-- <option>albers</option> -->
      <option>azimuthal-equal-area</option>
      <option>azimuthal-equidistant</option>
      <!-- <option>conic-conformal</option> -->
      <option>conic-equal-area</option>
      <option>conic-equidistant</option>
      <option>equal-earth</option>
      <option>equirectangular</option>
      <option>gnomonic</option>
      <!-- <option>identity</option> -->
      <!-- <option>reflect-y</option> -->
      <option>mercator</option>
      <option>orthographic</option>
      <option>stereographic</option>
      <option>transverse-mercator</option>
    </select>
  </label>
</p>

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-world-projections
```js-vue
Plot.plot({
  projection: "{{projection}}",
  marks: [
    Plot.graticule(),
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor"}),
    Plot.sphere()
  ]
})
```
:::

Why so many? Each projection has its strengths and weaknesses:

- _conformal_ projections preserve angles and local shape,
- _equal-area_ projections preserve area (use these for choropleths),
- _equidistant_ projections preserve distance from one (or two) points,
- _azimuthal_ projections expand radially from a central feature,
- _cylindrical_ projections have symmetry around the axis of rotation,
- the _stereographic_ projection preserves circles, and
- the _gnomonic_ projection displays all great circles as straight lines!

No single projection is best at everything. It is impossible, for example, for a projection to be both conformal and equal-area.

In addition to world projections, Plot provides the U.S.-centric *albers-usa* conic equal-area projection with an inset of Alaska and Hawaii. (Note that the scale for Alaska is diminished: it is projected at 0.35× its true relative area.)

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-albers-usa-projection
```js
Plot.plot({
  projection: "albers-usa",
  marks: [
    Plot.geo(nation),
    Plot.geo(statemesh, {strokeOpacity: 0.2})
  ]
})
```
:::

:::tip
Use the *albers-usa* projection for U.S.-centric choropleth maps.
:::

For maps that focus on a specific region, use the **domain** option to zoom in. This object should be a GeoJSON object. For example, you can use [d3.geoCircle](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#geoCircle) to generate a circle of a given radius centered at a given longitude and latitude. You can also use the **inset** options for a bit of padding around the **domain**.

<p>
  <label class="label-input">
    Radius:
    <input type="range" v-model.number="radius" min="10" max="50" step="0.1">
    <span style="font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;">{{radius.toFixed(1)}}°</span>
  </label>
</p>

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-projection-domain
```js
Plot.plot({
  projection: {
    type: "azimuthal-equidistant",
    rotate: [-9, -34],
    domain: circle,
    inset: 10
  },
  marks: [
    Plot.graticule(),
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor", fillOpacity: 0.3}),
    Plot.geo(circle, {stroke: "red", strokeWidth: 2}),
    Plot.frame()
  ]
})
```

```js
circle = d3.geoCircle().center([9, 34]).radius(radius)()
```

If none of Plot’s built-in projections meet your needs, you can use any of [D3’s extended projections](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo-projection) by specifying the **projection** option as a function that returns a D3 projection. Below, a map of Antarctica in a polar aspect of the *azimuthal-equidistant* projection.

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-polar-projection
```js
Plot.plot({
  width: 688,
  height: 688,
  projection: ({width, height}) => d3.geoAzimuthalEquidistant()
    .rotate([0, 90])
    .translate([width / 2, height / 2])
    .scale(width)
    .clipAngle(40),
  marks: [
    Plot.graticule(),
    Plot.geo(land, {fill: "currentColor"}),
    Plot.frame()
  ]
})
```
:::

While this notebook mostly details spherical projections, you can use the *identity* projection to display planar geometry. For example, below we draw a schematic of the second floor of the [Westport House](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westport_House) in Dundee, Ireland.

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-floor-plan
```js
Plot.geo(westport).plot({projection: {type: "identity", domain: westport}})
```
:::

:::tip
There’s also a *reflect-y* projection in case *y* points up↑, which is often the case with [projected reference systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Projected_coordinate_system).
:::

Naturally, Plot’s projection system is compatible with its [faceting system](./facets.md). Below, a comic strip of sorts shows the locations of Walmart store openings in past decades.

:::plot defer https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot-map-small-multiples
```js
Plot.plot({
  marginLeft: 0,
  marginRight: 0,
  projection: "albers",
  fx: {
    interval: d3.utcYear.every(10),
    tickFormat: (d) => `${d.getUTCFullYear()}’s`,
    label: null
  },
  marks: [
    Plot.geo(statemesh, {strokeOpacity: 0.1}),
    Plot.geo(nation),
    Plot.dot(walmarts, {fx: "date", x: "longitude", y: "latitude", r: 1, fill: "currentColor"})
  ]
})
```
:::

:::info
This uses the [**interval** scale option](./scales.md#scale-transforms) to bin temporal data into facets by decade.
:::

To learn more about mapping with Plot, see our hands-on tutorials:

* [Build your first map with Observable Plot](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/build-your-first-map-with-observable-plot)
* [Build your first choropleth map with Observable Plot](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/build-your-first-choropleth-map-with-observable-plot)

## Projection options

The **projection** [plot option](./plots.md) applies a two-dimensional (often geographic) projection in place of **x** and **y** scales. It is typically used in conjunction with a [geo mark](../marks/geo.md) to produce a map, but can be used with any mark that supports **x** and **y** channels, such as [dot](../marks/dot.md), [text](../marks/text.md), [arrow](../marks/arrow.md), and [rect](../marks/rect.md). For marks that use **x1**, **y1**, **x2**, and **y2** channels, the two projected points are ⟨*x1*, *y1*⟩ and ⟨*x2*, *y2*⟩; otherwise, the projected point is ⟨*x*, *y*⟩.

The following built-in named projections are supported:

* *equirectangular* - the equirectangular, or *plate carrée*, projection
* *orthographic* - the orthographic projection
* *stereographic* - the stereographic projection
* *mercator* - the Mercator projection
* *equal-earth* - the [Equal Earth projection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_Earth_projection) by Šavrič *et al.*
* *azimuthal-equal-area* - the azimuthal equal-area projection
* *azimuthal-equidistant* - the azimuthal equidistant projection
* *conic-conformal* - the conic conformal projection
* *conic-equal-area* - the conic equal-area projection
* *conic-equidistant* - the conic equidistant projection
* *gnomonic* - the gnomonic projection
* *transverse-mercator* - the transverse Mercator projection
* *albers* - the Albers’ conic equal-area projection
* *albers-usa* - a composite Albers conic equal-area projection suitable for the United States
* *identity* - the identity projection for planar geometry
* *reflect-y* - like the identity projection, but *y* points up
* null (default) - the null projection for pre-projected geometry in screen coordinates

In addition to these named projections, the **projection** option may be specified as a [D3 projection](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#projections), or any custom projection that implements [*projection*.stream](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#projection_stream), or a function that receives a configuration object ({*width*, *height*, ...*options*}) and returns such a projection. In the last case, the width and height represent the frame dimensions minus any insets.

If the **projection** option is specified as an object, the following additional projection options are supported:

* **type** - one of the projection names above
* **parallels** - the [standard parallels](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#conic_parallels) (for conic projections only)
* **precision** - the [sampling threshold](https://github.com/d3/d3-geo/blob/main/README.md#projection_precision)
* **rotate** - a two- or three- element array of Euler angles to rotate the sphere
* **domain** - a GeoJSON object to fit in the center of the (inset) frame
* **inset** - inset by the given amount in pixels when fitting to the frame (default zero)
* **insetLeft** - inset from the left edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **insetRight** - inset from the right edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **insetTop** - inset from the top edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **insetBottom** - inset from the bottom edge of the frame (defaults to inset)
* **clip** - the projection clipping method

The following projection clipping methods are supported for **clip**:

* *frame* or true (default) - clip to the extent of the frame (including margins but not insets)
* a number - clip to a great circle of the given radius in degrees centered around the origin
* null or false - do not clip

Whereas the **clip** [mark option](./marks.md#mark-options) is implemented using SVG clipping, the **clip** projection option affects the generated geometry and typically produces smaller SVG output.
