test/data/README.md, before:

# Test Datasets

## aapl.csv
Yahoo! Finance
https://finance.yahoo.com/lookup

## alphabet.csv
*Cryptographical Mathematics* by Robert Edward Lewand
http://cs.wellesley.edu/~fturbak/codman/letterfreq.html

## anscombe.csv
Anscome’s quartet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anscombe%27s_quartet

## athletes.csv
Matt Riggott/IOC
https://www.flother.is/2017/olympic-games-data/

## barley.csv
http://search.r-project.org/R/library/lattice/html/barley.html

## bls-metro-unemployment.csv
Bureau of Labor Statistics
https://www.bls.gov/

## cars.csv
1983 ASA Data Exposition
http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/

## covid-ihme-projected-deaths.csv
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
https://covid19.healthdata.org/

## d3-survey-2015.json
D3 Community Survey, 2015
https://github.com/enjalot/d3surveys

## diamonds.csv
ggplot2 “diamonds” dataset (carat and price columns only)
https://github.com/tidyverse/ggplot2/blob/master/data-raw/diamonds.csv

## gistemp.csv
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies
https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/

## hadcrut-annual.txt
Met Office Hadley Centre
https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/hadcrut4/data/current/series_format.html

## metros.csv
The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/02/upshot/wealth-poverty-divide-american-cities.html

## moby-dick-chapter-1.txt
*Moby Dick; or The Whale* by Herman Melville
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2701/2701-h/2701-h.htm

## morley.csv
Michelson Speed of Light Data
https://github.com/vincentarelbundock/Rdatasets/blob/master/csv/datasets/morley.csv

## movies.json
Vega
https://github.com/vega/vega-datasets/blob/master/SOURCES.md#moviesjson

## nc-absentee-votes.csv
unknown

## penguins.csv
Dr. Kristen Gorman
https://github.com/allisonhorst/palmerpenguins

## seattle-weather.csv
NOAA/Vega
https://github.com/vega/vega-datasets/blob/master/scripts/weather.py

## sf-temperatures.csv
National Climatic Data Center
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/

## simpsons.csv
IMDb/Todd W. Schneider
https://data.world/data-society/the-simpsons-by-the-data

## travelers.csv
TSA
https://www.tsa.gov/coronavirus/passenger-throughput

## us-population-state-age.csv
U.S. Census Bureau
https://observablehq.com/@d3/barcode-plot

## us-presidential-election-2020.csv
Fabio Votta/Edison Research/NYT
https://github.com/favstats/USElection2020-EdisonResearch-Results

## us-retail-sales.csv
U.S. Census Bureau
https://www.census.gov/retail/mrts/historic_releases.html

## us-state-population-2010-2019.csv
U.S. Census Bureau (?)
https://observablehq.com/@d3/diverging-bar-chart

## wealth-britain.csv
U.K. Office for National Statistics
A recreation of “Who owns Britain?” by Richard Speigal; proportion plot chart type by Stephanie Evergreen
https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:6758306750174138368/
https://stephanieevergreen.com/proportion-plots/

Commit message:

Image mark (#599)
* Create Image mark

* Added snapshot test result

* Adding US President data example

* Removed NBA data example, regenerated snapshots

* Removed imageX and imageY

* Changed size to r

* Updated image and image-test to 0.2.0

* Added preserveAspectRatio and crossorigin to image

* Fix for new attrs

* fix test snapshot

* fold transform into xy; crossOrigin; style

* width, height, src

* implied xMidYMid

* default width to height

* ignore fill and stroke on images

* opacity

* allow constant src

* Update README

* Update README

* Update README

Co-authored-by: Robert Lesser <bclesser@gmail.com>

test/data/README.md, after:

# Test Datasets

## aapl.csv
Yahoo! Finance
https://finance.yahoo.com/lookup

## alphabet.csv
*Cryptographical Mathematics* by Robert Edward Lewand
http://cs.wellesley.edu/~fturbak/codman/letterfreq.html

## anscombe.csv
Anscome’s quartet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anscombe%27s_quartet

## athletes.csv
Matt Riggott/IOC
https://www.flother.is/2017/olympic-games-data/

## barley.csv
http://search.r-project.org/R/library/lattice/html/barley.html

## bls-metro-unemployment.csv
Bureau of Labor Statistics
https://www.bls.gov/

## cars.csv
1983 ASA Data Exposition
http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/

## covid-ihme-projected-deaths.csv
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
https://covid19.healthdata.org/

## d3-survey-2015.json
D3 Community Survey, 2015
https://github.com/enjalot/d3surveys

## diamonds.csv
ggplot2 “diamonds” dataset (carat and price columns only)
https://github.com/tidyverse/ggplot2/blob/master/data-raw/diamonds.csv

## gistemp.csv
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies
https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/

## hadcrut-annual.txt
Met Office Hadley Centre
https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/hadcrut4/data/current/series_format.html

## metros.csv
The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/02/upshot/wealth-poverty-divide-american-cities.html

## moby-dick-chapter-1.txt
*Moby Dick; or The Whale* by Herman Melville
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2701/2701-h/2701-h.htm

## morley.csv
Michelson Speed of Light Data
https://github.com/vincentarelbundock/Rdatasets/blob/master/csv/datasets/morley.csv

## movies.json
Vega
https://github.com/vega/vega-datasets/blob/master/SOURCES.md#moviesjson

## nc-absentee-votes.csv
unknown

## penguins.csv
Dr. Kristen Gorman
https://github.com/allisonhorst/palmerpenguins

## seattle-weather.csv
NOAA/Vega
https://github.com/vega/vega-datasets/blob/master/scripts/weather.py

## sf-temperatures.csv
National Climatic Data Center
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/

## simpsons.csv
IMDb/Todd W. Schneider
https://data.world/data-society/the-simpsons-by-the-data

## travelers.csv
TSA
https://www.tsa.gov/coronavirus/passenger-throughput

## us-population-state-age.csv
U.S. Census Bureau
https://observablehq.com/@d3/barcode-plot

## us-president-favorability.csv
YouGov (polling data) and Wikipedia (presidential portraits)
https://today.yougov.com/topics/politics/articles-reports/2021/07/27/most-and-least-popular-us-presidents-according-ame
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_presidents_of_the_United_States

## us-presidential-election-2020.csv
Fabio Votta/Edison Research/NYT
https://github.com/favstats/USElection2020-EdisonResearch-Results

## us-retail-sales.csv
U.S. Census Bureau
https://www.census.gov/retail/mrts/historic_releases.html

## us-state-population-2010-2019.csv
U.S. Census Bureau (?)
https://observablehq.com/@d3/diverging-bar-chart

## wealth-britain.csv
U.K. Office for National Statistics
A recreation of “Who owns Britain?” by Richard Speigal; proportion plot chart type by Stephanie Evergreen
https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:6758306750174138368/
https://stephanieevergreen.com/proportion-plots/
